:date: 2013-06-18
:tags: greek, cosmogony, mythology, history
:category: science, astronomy
:language: en

Order and Origin of the Greek Cosmos
====================================

Second article based on my talk on "Greek Cosmogony and Cosmology" of astronomy
in the Parque de los Deseos on May 14, 2013 (the first was
:doc:`/en/blog/2013/cosmogonia-griega`).

Thales of Miletus, the first Greek philosopher, incorporated the first
non-mythological notions into the description and explanation of the world and
tried to clarify the mystery of the first substance, considering it water. For
Thales, the world was a circular disk floating in the ocean. Anaximander (the
second Ionian philosopher) would abandon the views of Thales and the arche, and
assign the infinite or the indefinite as the principle. By symmetry, the Earth
should be flat or convex and in equilibrium with the center of the universe. The
nature of the heavens is fire and it is spherical. The celestial bodies are
located at different distances, with the sun being more distant than the sphere
of fixed stars. The celestial bodies are holes that allow the fire of the sky to
be seen.

Anaximenes (the third Ionian philosopher) found the principle in the air, which,
by compression or rarefaction, would lead to the creation of everything. The
Earth has its origin in dense air. The Earth, like the moon, the sun and the
planets, is flat, and the fixed stars are like nails in a solid.

Xenophanes, the founder of the Eleatics, considered the principle in the Earth.
The Earth is flat and embedded in infinity, while the sun, comets and stars are
incandescent clouds. The sun and the stars are formed daily from clouds of
burning particles, while the moon is a compressed cloud whose brightness comes
from an inherent light that is extinguished monthly.

Parmenides, virtual founder of the Eleatics, is responsible for the first
distinction of a spherical Earth. He considers the entire universe in concentric
spherical layers around the stationary Earth. It is the first conception of
concentric spheres. He considered the moon's brightness to be a reflection of
the sun's light, and the origin of these was the residual material of the Milky
Way. Like Anaximander, he makes the same mistake of placing the fixed stars
closer than the sun. Heraclitus would consider fire a principle based on the
fact that everything came to flow. The sun would be formed from exhalations from
the Earth.

Anaxagoras affirms that the universe contains only two things: an infinite
number of small particles (atoms) and the void that extends to infinity. Atoms
are made of the same thing but differ in shape and size. It incorporates
Leucippus' principle of causality. Democritus affirms that the shadows of the
moon reflect the existence of mountains, losing the perfect nature of the moon.
These constitute Greek atomism, and the three together support a flat Earth.

For the Stoics, the cosmos is finite and surrounded by an infinite void. It is
in a state of flux, pulsating in size periodically. Aristotle proposed a
spherical Earth surrounded by concentric celestial spheres between which the
first ones around the Earth are the elements in the order earth, water, air and
fire. The universe exists unchanged throughout eternity. It contains a fifth
element called ether, above which the celestial bodies are found.

Aristarchus introduces the first mention of the sun in the center, in which,
following the line of thought of Philolaus (the Pythagorean who proposes the
first non-geocentric model with a central fire), he identified the central fire
with the sun and assigned the correct positions to the planets. he Earth rotates
and orbits the sun. The sphere of fixed stars is so distant that it is
impossible to detect parallax.

**To know more**

1. `The cosmological ideas among the Greeks
   <http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu//full/1916PA.....24..358M/0000358.000.html>`_.
   Hector MacPherson, Popular Astronomy, Vol. 24, p.358 (1916).
2. :doc:`/en/blog/2012/la-evolucion-en-los-griegos`. Cosmoscalibur, May 13,
   2012.
3. `Arche <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arche>`_. Wikipedia (english version).
   June 18, 2013.
