---
date: 2013-01-18
tags: science fiction, asimov, literature, chemistry
category: science
language: en
---

# Asimov in Science

While Isaac Asimov is commonly known as a science fiction and mystery writer
(the latter being less widely known) and a great science popularizer, he was
also a scientist. This article aims to highlight Asimov's scientific
contributions and academic background, often overshadowed by his literary
achievements.

## Early Life and Education

Isaac Asimov, or in Russian *Isaak Yudovich Ozimov*, was born on January 2,
1920, in Petrovichi, Russia. His family immigrated to the United States when he
was three years old. Asimov obtained undergraduate, master's, and doctoral
degrees in chemistry from Columbia University in New York City. Postgraduate
degrees confer research skills, leading to what is popularly known as being a
scientist.

## Scientific Career and Research

To obtain a doctorate, it is necessary to contribute new knowledge on a topic.
His doctoral thesis was specifically in biochemistry (an area in which he also
served as a full professor at Boston University) with the thesis "*Kinetics of
the Reaction Inactivation of Tyrosinase During Its Catalysis of the Aerobic
Oxidation of Catechol*". He was a chemical researcher (scientist) for the Navy
and later for the Army, in which he participated in the atomic bomb tests at
Bikini.

## Scientific Publications

Beyond his research work, Asimov also published formal and scientific texts, not
intended for popularization. Notable examples include "*Modern Biology*" (1961),
"*Biochemistry and Human Metabolism*" (1952), his first non-fiction book
co-authored with two colleagues from the Boston University School of Medicine,
and "*The Human Body*" (1963). He also contributed to the "*Letters*" section of
the journal *Science*, participating in impactful debates in biology during the
1960s and 1970s.

## Conclusion

Isaac Asimov's legacy extends beyond his prolific science fiction writing. His
rigorous scientific training and contributions to the field of biochemistry
demonstrate a multifaceted career that significantly impacted both science and
literature.

## Sources:

1. [Isaac Asimov](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Asimov). Wikipedia in
   English.
2. [Biography for Isaac Asimov](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001920/bio). IMDb.
3. [Isaac Asimov](http://www.biography.com/people/isaac-asimov-9190737).
   Biography True Story.
4. [Isaac Asimov Biography](http://www.notablebiographies.com/An-Ba/Asimov-Isaac.html#ixzz2Hp8BaOVW).
   Notable Biographies.
