---
date: 2013-01-04
tags: newton, calendar, history, christmas
category: science
language: en
---

# Newton's Double Birthday and the Gregorian Calendar

The commemoration of Sir Isaac Newton's birth presents a curiosity: it is
celebrated on both December 25, 1642, and January 4, 1643. This dual observance
stems from the shift between the Julian and Gregorian calendars. This article
explores the reasons behind this double celebration, delving into the historical
context of the calendar reform and its impact on the dating of historical
events.

## The Calendar Reform

The change from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar resulted from the papal
bull *Inter Gravissimas*, issued by Gregory XIII. This bull revoked the Julian
calendar, which had been in use since its implementation by Julius Caesar, and
established the Gregorian calendar. The primary motivation for this change was
to correct the Julian calendar's drift relative to the date of Easter. The
Council of Nicaea (325 AD) had fixed Easter as the Sunday following the first
full moon after the spring equinox. By the 16th century, the Julian calendar had
drifted, causing the spring equinox to occur approximately ten days earlier than
its intended date of March 21.

## Implementation and Discrepancies

The Gregorian calendar reform, overseen by ecclesiastical jurist Ugo Buocompagni
(Gregory XIII) and implemented with the help of astronomer Christoph Clavius and
physician Luigi Lilio, resulted in ten days being skipped: October 4, 1582, was
followed by October 15, 1582. However, the adoption of the Gregorian calendar
was not immediate or universal. Due to geographical distances and varying levels
of papal influence, different regions adopted the new calendar at different
times. For instance, Spanish territories in South America transitioned a year
later.

## Newton's Birth and the Calendar Discrepancy

Isaac Newton was born in 1642, at a time when England still used the Julian
calendar. Therefore, his birthdate was recorded as December 25, 1642, according
to the Julian calendar then in use in England. However, according to the
Gregorian calendar, which was already in use across much of Europe and the
Americas, his birthdate corresponds to January 4, 1643. England did not adopt
the Gregorian calendar until 1752, further highlighting the historical
complexities surrounding the dating of events from this period.

## Conclusion

The double celebration of Newton's birth serves as a reminder of the
complexities introduced by historical calendar reforms. The shift from the
Julian to the Gregorian calendar not only corrected astronomical inaccuracies
but also created discrepancies in historical records, requiring careful
consideration when interpreting dates from this era.

## Sources

1. [Isaac Newton](http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Newton). Spanish Wikipedia.
2. [Julian Calendar](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_calendar). English
   Wikipedia.
3. [Gregorian Calendar](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gregorian_calendar).
   English Wikipedia.
4. [The Julian Calendar](http://www.timeanddate.com/calendar/julian-calendar.html).
   Time and Date.
5. [The Gregorian Calendar](http://www.timeanddate.com/calendar/gregorian-calendar.html).
   Time and Date.
6. [Inter gravissimas](http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Inter_gravissimas).
   Wikisources.
7. [The calendar reform](http://www.luxinarcana.org/en/documenti/curiosita/la-riforma-del-calendario/).
   Lux in arcana - The Vatican Secret Archives reveals itself.
