---
date: 2025-10-08
tags: mastodon, fediverse, android, tusky, megalodon, moshidon
category: technology, software
---

# Finding the Best Mastodon Client for Android

Navigating the Fediverse is an experience that largely depends on the client you
use. In my case, as an Android user, I've gone through several applications
looking for the one that best fits my workflow and offers a comfortable and
stable user experience. This has been my journey through three of the most
popular clients: {program}`Tusky`, {program}`Megalodon` and {program}`Moshidon`.

## {program}`Tusky`: The Popular Starting Point

My first foray was with [Tusky](https://tusky.app/), probably the best-known
Mastodon client on Android. It's a robust application and an excellent gateway
to the Fediverse. However, I soon began to encounter some friction in my daily
use.

The main problem for me was managing hashtags. I found the process of following
topics of interest unintuitive, a crucial function for keeping up to date in
specific niches. In addition, the reading experience to catch up with my
timeline was uncomfortable; I felt that I easily lost track when trying to
explore conversations or long posts.

## {program}`Megalodon`: More Features, New Problems

Looking to solve the drawbacks of {program}`Tusky`, I migrated to
[Megalodon](https://sk22.github.io/megalodon/). The change was immediately
positive in several aspects. The ability to follow hashtags was implemented in a
much more direct way and, above all, the way to explore the compacted timeline
was fantastic, allowing you to expand the block of publications of several hours
up or down to catch up quickly.

It seemed that I had found my ideal client, but stability was not on my side. I
began to suffer from recurring synchronization problems, where the timeline was
not updated correctly or notifications arrived late. Added to this were sporadic
failures that showed unhelpful errors about required properties, forcing me to
close and reopen the application for everything to return to normal. This
application was discontinued on May 30, 2025.

## {program}`Moshidon`: The (for now) definitive solution

When the instability of {program}`Megalodon` became too frequent, I discovered
[Moshidon](https://lucasggamerm.github.io/moshidon/). Being a fork of
{program}`Megalodon` itself, it kept all the features that I had loved: the
excellent reading interface and the easy management of tags.

The big difference is that {program}`Moshidon` has solved the stability problems
that plagued my previous experience. Synchronization is reliable, timelines are
updated as they should, and I have not encountered the random errors that
previously interrupted my use. The application simply works, combining the best
of the {program}`Megalodon` interface with the stability I needed.

## Conclusion

My journey through Mastodon clients on Android has been a process of iteration.
{program}`Tusky` was a good start, {program}`Megalodon` showed me the features I
wanted but at the cost of reliability, and {program}`Moshidon` has turned out to
be, for me, the perfect synthesis of both.

If you are looking for a Mastodon client for Android that is stable, rich in
features and with a superior reading experience, my current recommendation is,
without a doubt, {program}`Moshidon`.
